# PopulationDynamics
Repository dedicated to my notes and analysis of population dynamics, focusing
on the propagation of CoViD19.

Main reference file for this project is
[_PopulationDynamics.ipynb_](https://github.com/f-hipolito/PopulationDynamics/blob/master/Population_dynamics.ipynb),
it contains all relevant information and points to other relevant files.

While the primary focus is the propagation of CoViD19, the model is general
and easy to apply to any population whose growth is governed by a first order
differential equation relating the rate of change of population to a function
of both time (t) and population (n).
The (initial) scope was restricted to separable functions of t and n, but we
are now in the process of relaxing this restriction, by introducing further
generalizations.

__Important note to the readers:__
I am neither an epidemiologist or virologist! I'm just a curious physicist
trying to understand and make some sense of the vast amounts of data on CoViD19
available online, and willing to share it for other curious minds to explore as
well.
It should go without saying, but I will still state the obvious advice
nonetheless:
** _None_ of information made available in this repository _serves as
credible_ source of _information on COVID19_ ** .


## Data source:
We collected our data from two sources.
First data source, used up to 2020-05-13 is the _European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control_ (ECDC).
Second data source, used from 2020-05-13 until present is the _datahub.io_
dataset on [CoViD19](https://github.com/datasets/covid-19).
This is sourced from this upstream repository maintained by the team at
[Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering](https://systems.jhu.edu/) (JHU CSSE)

Primary reason to changing to the JHU CSSE data set was the absence of recovered
data in the ECDC dataset.


Data is publicly available at:
* _datahub.io/covid-19_ available at [github repository](https://github.com/datasets/covid-19)
  1. the original dataset from JHU CSSE is available at
  [github repository](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19)
* ECDC [site](https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/download-todays-data-geographic-distribution-covid-19-cases-worldwide)
Copyright information available in the respective urls.

Datasets identifiers
* datahub.io/covid-19 (commit hash)
    1.  _3df63747aeab5d03936459ccfdd536970a9db164_ collected on 2020-06-08
* ECDC (checksums available in _sha256sums_ file)
    1. _aRnzjSwT_ collected on 2020-04-17T21:29
    2. _6u83xREK_ collected on 2020-04-25T16:41


## Contents of _PopulationDynamics.ipynb_
1. Models under consideration
    1. the model
        1. Time-dependent environment: _m-_ steady state model
        2. General time-dependent rates and decay times
        3. Coupled differential equations (SIR like models)
    2. application and discussion
        1. Korea
        2. Denmark
        3. Portugal
2. Review of the differential equations
    1. Constant environments
        1. exponential growth
        2. logistic equation
        3. growth rate coefficient
    2. Time dependent environments
        1. _m-_ transitions between steady states
        2. smooth transitions
        3. the Gamma distribution


## Code organization and programming language
As this project grew in size, I decided to move all code to external files,
thus dedicating this primary notebook to theory and discussion.
The results discussed in this file are generated by the following notebooks
* Korea.ipynb
* Denmark.ipynb
* Portugal.ipynb

that can be found in the root folder for this project.

User defined auxiliary function are made available via two modules
* MyFunctions.jl: general purpose user defined functions;
* Mrate.jl: dedicated to m-steady state model and SIR like model functions.

All code was written with Julia 1.4.x, for reference see the
[official documentation](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1.4/).
Additional required packages and modules (for Julia only):
* SpecialFunctions
* MyFunctions, Mrate (local modules provided in the repository)
* DataFrames, Query, CSV, Dates
* LsqFit (logistic model only)
* DifferentialEquations, DiffEqParamEstim, Optim
* Plots, LaTeXStrings
A python 3.x version is in the pipeline, but priority is given to project
development using Julia.

Coupled differential equations are integrated numerically using the
open source suite [DifferentialEquations.jl](https://docs.sciml.ai/stable/)
provided by https://sciml.ai/.
The parameter estimation is performed with
[DiffEqParamEstim.jl](https://docs.sciml.ai/latest/analysis/parameter_estimation/)
which in turn uses
[Optim.jl](https://julianlsolvers.github.io/Optim.jl/stable/#).
The above-mentioned software packages are written in Julia and are available for
Julia, Python and R.
